I find it very interesting you often
speak uh about your experience of
religion and I have a very interesting
reaction to it which is um I come from
the opposite starting place and I almost
never hear you say anything that strikes
me as wrong um so I have the sense that
we are converging on a perspective and I
want to talk a little bit and so the
thing that you said happening at
Peterson academy by the way we have a
bunch of thinkers who are doing exactly
that and it is this new urgence a as you
as you would hope it's sort of the the
the the best indicator that you were on
the right track either you're telling
yourself a foolish story and everybody's
converged on it or you've discovered
something real and that means it doesn't
matter where your starting point is
you'll land there so um your point about
God doesn't need to exist to answer
prayers I've long believed this a
horrible thing to say no it's not and in
fact I wonder if you will
remember um that I said something like
that to Sam Harris in the debate where I
moderated between you two he laughed
about the idea of a a prayer answering
God and I gave him a evolutionary
account of how that could work in effect
I believe my example would have been
something like were you to pray before
going to
bed about some problem that you thought
need needed a divine intervention in
order to remedy it that would likely
Prime you to dream about that problem
and potentially to wake with some
insight about it which frankly Waking
with insights is a known phenomenon so
that is one way in which prayer could
actually manifest in an improvement in
the world that does not require there to
be an external being so let's just take
that as a stem the thing I most want to
go back
to is
you're talking you you laid out a a
principle and your principle was that
you should not
invoke uh
religious terminology or descriptions
where they are not necessary that is to
say we can explain many things without
resorting to those tools and they should
be reserved it's part of not using God's
name in vain by the way now here's the
point I want to make to you and um
frankly there's a part of me I know that
you and me and Richard Dawkins need to
have this conversation and I am sorry to
say that he has become cowardly an old
age and refuses to have the conversation
that's a that's a tragedy because I
believe a tremendous amount of
productive uh Insight would come from
that conversation he is going to talk to
me a he is going to talk to me but and I
had proposed you as an interlocutor but
he picked another gentleman who might do
a credible job yeah we need better than
credible here and I will tell you that
uh if you go back into if you go back
into Dawkins catalog you will find that
he did I've forgotten the name of it but
he did a documentary basically an
atheist new atheist documentary and
there's a scene in it that struck
me uh rather profoundly the scene is
Richard Dawkins is talking to a
religious Authority and they are having
a pitched argument of about the logic of
the universe and it becomes quite clear
if you watch this that Richard Dawkins
knows he is winning this argument but so
does the other guy they are each winning
to their own audience and what they're
doing is they are missing the
opportunity to actually discover
anything and my concern is I I know
Richard Dawkins tradition because I've
read many of his books he's in I
consider him a mentor of mine and I come
from the same
the same tradition so he Richard Dawkins
is very close to seeing something
important that he hasn't seen yet that
actually makes his own work vastly more
important than it has yet I agree with
that absolutely but anyway let's let's
put him aside for the
moment the issue that I think is so
important is imagine a Continuum from
the perfectly literal to the perfectly
metaphorical and let us say that uh
religions longstanding religions that
have stood the test of time are very
close to the end of the Continuum where
they are perfectly
metaphorical and that our best cases the
places where we've been most effective
at understanding uh
phenomena that uh we now have a great
predictive model of we're very close to
being perfectly literal about and then
most things exist somewhere in in
between right biology for example we do
not have a perfectly descriptive model
because complexity and because the
process of time erasing evidence has
caused us to have a much cruder
understanding of biology than we do for
example of chemistry or physics right
we're earlier in the study it uh you
could say the same thing about
psychology but the point is it is
natural for us not to look at the vast
amount we don't know and be paralyzed by
it it is natural for us to tell the part
of the story that we can tell rigorously
in rigorous terms and to tell what we no
longer acknowledge is a metaphorical
story to fill in the spaces even this
happens even in your in your science
textbook but your science textbook
doesn't admit that that's what it's
doing that's right that's right and that
was the role that Yung thought dreams
played by the way Tech that's that's
exactly his theory of dream and I would
say that what you described as that
greater ability to see across larger
gaps the point is the dream apparatus
which I would tell you has to be
logically a product of adaptive
Evolution it has served our ancestors to
have it it plays this function where the
it is allowed to violate any rule wants
to to explore a possibility and
presumably many of those little
Explorations land on nothing and
occasionally one of those Explorations
lands on a Transcendent connection that
if your waking mind was free to make
those connections at all times you'd be
in big trouble okay okay so I I want to
modify my statement about the unreality
of God for a moment with regard to what
you just said okay so now imagine
imagine this imagine that the Revelation
that you've been praying for when you're
oriented towards the highest good makes
itself manifest and then let's say it's
valid okay so it's the valid issue that
becomes of crucial interest here because
if I have a revelation that's valid that
means I can act it out in the world and
it will have the predictive power of the
future that you described it'll be
efficacious in the world you know how
you can strike while the iron is hot
that's what you're trying to do in
Washington Washton you think it's the
right time you know how you can
aggregate a lot of information you can
have a sense of timing it's the right
thing at the right moment okay so now
imagine that that speaks of the
underlying Harmony of being itself right
and so here's a weird thing that to add
to that initial statement is that even
if God is not real in the way that we
just described the revelations that
emerge from that Source are deeply real
because they speak of the relationship
between the individual and the social
community and the natural world in a
manner that's practically realizable and
exactly timed and so this is I think why
it's reasonable to think about God In
terms beyond the real and the non-real
is because there is that element of
non-reality it's something that
you conjure into existence as a
consequence of your quest but it's also
The Voice of what's truly deepest
because otherwise it would have no
purchase in the world and
so you know the there's an ancient line
of Jewish speculation that proposes that
that that God and man are in a sense
twins that they each call the other into
being and and in a genuine Manner and I
think this mode of conceptualization
sheds some light on that in a manner
that's you know somewhat
comprehensible all right can I try two
things on you as long as we're deep down
on this rabbit
hole and this is a point I have been
trying to make to Richard Dawkins which
he cannot
hear the Ancients had no idea about
genes they couldn't nor would it have
helped them
to they don't understand that they are
suffering from a kind of delusion which
is about the significance of
self self is a very temporary
instantiation
of
lineage Evolution does not care about
the self because the self is disposable
the lineage either continues or fails to
continue an evolutionary success is not
how much you reproduce it's how far into
the future your lineage is capable of
making so that's the story of Abraham by
the way you're telling me yeah yeah okay
okay so here's my
point is heaven real
yes and no we have no evidence that
there's a
place on the other hand if you live so
as to get into heaven what it will do
for reasons that a sociologist at least
a good sociologist would easily
recognize is it will place your kin and
your descendants in an excellent
position relative to each other to get
into the future do you live on after
death yes you do you live on in
lineate right it's not the individual so
it's a modification of the reality but
the point is how much difference is
there between the idea of living on
after you die in the way that any
biologist would recognize that a
successful individual did and living on
after you die in some storybook form
that's much easier to convey to a child
or to an uninitiated person right my
point is that these life after death
does exist every biologist agrees they
just don't put it in those terms so the
question
is why are we allowed to draw where in
that Continuum from the fully uh
descriptive and material to the fully
metaphorical are we allowed to draw the
line and say here is where we have
stopped being analytical if it's a
Continuum it is a Continuum and the the
place where I fault my colleague the
most is that they do not understand they
do not acknowledge the degree to which
even the models that we have inside of
biology are largely metaphorical not
because we won't ultimately know how
biology works but because we don't know
yet and you know even just to look back
into the recent history of biology you
can see that it is a question of
replacing approximate stories
metaphorical stories with literal
stories and that doesn't break down when
we get out towards what is obviously an
Adaptive tendency of human beings to
believe in a spirit Realm
[Music]